Join the Nasdaq Community today and get free, instant access to portfolios, stock ratings, real-time alerts, and more!
 
 Marathon Oil    (NYSE: MRO) delivered strong operational and financial results   through the   third quarter    of last year, which had the company on track to end 2018 on a   high note. Investors will find out whether that's the case when   the company reports its fourth-quarter results. That's one of   several things they should keep their eye on when reviewing tha   t report    .
Marathon Oil's drilling machine generated a gusher of   production through the first nine months of last year as the   company exceeded its expectations in   each quarter    . Because of that, anything less than a high-end result in the   fourth quarter would likely disappoint the market.
  
Image source: Getty Images.
After producing an average of 419,000 barrels of oil   equivalent per day (BOE/D) during the third quarter, Marathon   sees its production averaging between 400,000 and 420,000 BOE/D   during the final period, which is lower at the midpoint due in   part to recent asset sales. However, achieving that forecast   would enable the company to produce between 405,000 to 415,000   BOE/D for the full year, which would be 15% to 19% higher than   2017's average. Ideally, the company will achieve the high end of   both ranges.
There's a good reason to believe it could deliver another   strong quarter. One factor driving that view is Marathon's   announcement in December that its four-well test in the Ajax area   of North Dakota's Bakken shale achieved strong initial production   results, which marked a continuation of the company's drilling   success in that region. As long as it didn't disappoint   elsewhere, then there's an excellent chance Marathon produced   another gusher in the fourth quarter.
As    oil   prices    rose through the first nine months of last year, it caused   several of Marathon's peers to boost their capital spending   plans.   ConocoPhillips    (NYSE: COP) , for example, increased its budget twice, going from   an initial level of $5.5 billion up to $6.1 billion by year-end.   Meanwhile,   Anadarko Petroleum    (NYSE: APC) set its budget range between $4.2 billion and $4.6   billion but ended up spending $4.8 billion. Marathon, on the   other hand, had resisted the temptation to boost spending,   keeping a tight lid on its budget at $2.3 billion.
Because of that, investors should see if the company   maintained its capital discipline during the fourth quarter.   There's a high probability that was the case since oil prices   crashed 40% during the period, which caused many drillers to slow   down their activities and spending level. Further, the company   noted in December that it repurchased another $150 million in   stock during the quarter, which it likely wouldn't have done if   capital spending was running above budget. While those two   factors suggest that the company did achieve its aim of sticking   to its budget last year, investors should still make sure that   was the case. If not, they should see if the company had a good   reason to go over budget.
Marathon Oil expects to unveil its 2019 capital plans when it   reports fourth-quarter results. The company has made it clear in   the past that its strategy is to keep spending to the cash flows   it can generate on $50 oil, which last year was $2.3 billion. As   such, investors should see if the company plans to stick to that   same strategy this year, which would line up with what rivals   ConocoPhillips and Anadarko Petroleum are planning to do.
In addition to checking out its capital plans, investors   should see if the company intends on sending them any more money   this year. While Marathon has joined both ConocoPhillips and   Anadarko Petroleum in buying back its shares, it has yet to start   increasing its dividend. Because of that, the company's yield has   fallen behind those two rivals, which have raised their payouts   several times over the past few years. As such, word of an   upcoming dividend increase would be excellent news.
Marathon Oil has a history of under-promising and   over-delivering. Because of that, it would be rather   disappointing to see the company miss its production guidance and   spend above its budget. However, it could partially offset any   disappointment by remaining disciplined in 2019 and aiming to   return more cash to shareholders, because those actions would   keep it among an   elite group of oil stocks    .
 
 10 stocks we like better than Marathon Oil       When investing geniuses David and Tom Gardner have a stock tip,     it can pay to listen. After all, the newsletter they have run     for over a decade,     Motley Fool Stock Advisor      , has quadrupled the market.*
David and Tom just revealed what they believe are the      10 best stocks       for investors to buy right now... and Marathon Oil wasn't one     of them! That's right -- they think these 10 stocks are even     better buys.
  See the 10 stocks  
 *Stock Advisor returns as of January 31, 2019 
  Matthew DiLallo      owns shares of ConocoPhillips. The Motley Fool has no position     in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool has a     disclosure policy      . 

The views and opinions expressed herein are the views and opinions of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of Nasdaq, Inc.