Join the Nasdaq Community today and get free, instant access to portfolios, stock ratings, real-time alerts, and more!
 
Looking for broad exposure to the Energy - Exploration segment of the equity market? You should consider the iShares U.S. Oil & Gas Exploration & Production ETF (IEO), a passively managed exchange traded fund launched on 05/01/2006.
While an excellent vehicle for long term investors, passively managed ETFs are a popular choice among institutional and retail investors due to their low costs, transparency, flexibility, and tax efficiency.
Additionally, sector ETFs offer convenient ways to gain low risk and diversified exposure to a broad group of companies in particular sectors. Energy - Exploration is one of the 16 broad Zacks sectors within the Zacks Industry classification. It is currently ranked 15, placing it in bottom 6%.
 Index Details 
The fund is sponsored by Blackrock. It has amassed assets over $315.01 M, making it one of the larger ETFs attempting to match the performance of the Energy - Exploration segment of the equity market. IEO seeks to match the performance of the Dow Jones U.S. Select Oil Exploration & Production Index before fees and expenses.
The Dow Jones U.S. Select Oil Exploration & Production Index is a free-float adjusted market capitalization-weighted index. The Index includes companies that are engaged in the exploration for and extraction, production, refining, and supply of oil and gas products.
 Costs 
Since cheaper funds tend to produce better results than more expensive funds, assuming all other factors remain equal, it is important for investors to pay attention to an ETF's expense ratio.
Annual operating expenses for this ETF are 0.43%, making it one of the cheaper products in the space.
It has a 12-month trailing dividend yield of 1.49%.
 Sector Exposure and Top Holdings 
ETFs offer a diversified exposure and thus minimize single stock risk but it is still important to delve into a fund's holdings before investing. Most ETFs are very transparent products and many disclose their holdings on a daily basis.
This ETF has heaviest allocation in the Energy sector--about 100% of the portfolio.
Looking at individual holdings, Conocophillips (COP) accounts for about 14.08% of total assets, followed by Eog Resources Inc (EOG) and Marathon Petroleum Corp (MPC).
The top 10 holdings account for about 65.29% of total assets under management.
 Performance and Risk 
Year-to-date, the iShares U.S. Oil & Gas Exploration & Production ETF has added about 11.95% so far, and is down about -2.67% over the last 12 months (as of 02/14/2019). IEO has traded between $47.66 and $78.42 in this past 52-week period.
The ETF has a beta of 1.36 and standard deviation of 26.21% for the trailing three-year period, making it a high risk choice in the space. With about 67 holdings, it effectively diversifies company-specific risk.
 Alternatives 
IShares U.S. Oil & Gas Exploration & Production ETF carries a Zacks ETF Rank of 3 (Hold), which is based on expected asset class return, expense ratio, and momentum, among other factors. Thus, IEO is a good option for those seeking exposure to the Energy ETFs area of the market. Investors might also want to consider some other ETF options in the space.
Invesco Dynamic Energy Exploration & Production ETF (PXE) tracks Dynamic Energy Exploration & Production Intellidex Index and the SPDR S&P Oil & Gas Exploration & Production ETF (XOP) tracks S&P Oil & Gas Exploration & Production Select Industry Index. Invesco Dynamic Energy Exploration & Production ETF has $42.59 M in assets, SPDR S&P Oil & Gas Exploration & Production ETF has $2.13 B. PXE has an expense ratio of 0.65% and XOP charges 0.35%.
 Bottom Line 
To learn more about this product and other ETFs, screen for products that match your investment objectives and read articles on latest developments in the ETF investing universe, please visit Zacks ETF Center  .

The views and opinions expressed herein are the views and opinions of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of Nasdaq, Inc.




Enter up to 25 symbols separated by commas or spaces in the text box below. These symbols will be available during your session for use on applicable pages.

					You have selected to change your default setting for the Quote Search. This will now be your default target page;
					unless you change your configuration again, or you delete your
					cookies. Are you sure you want to change your settings?

Please disable your ad blocker (or update your settings to ensure that javascript and cookies are enabled), so that we can continue to provide you with the first-rate market news and data you've come to expect from us.
